1.) How and why do hot spots provide important evidence regarding the rate and direction of plate motion?

Hot spots provide important evidence concerning the rate and direction in which tectonic plates are moving. This is due to the presence of mantle plumes associated with isolated hot spot volcanoes. Mantle plumes are columns of magma which rise through the upper mantle and break the crust to form volcanoes at weak points within the overlying tectonic plate. Over time the overlying plate continues to drift due to geological processes, while the hot spots, for the most part, seem to be relatively stationary. As the plate along over the mantle plumes, and magma continues to erupt and raise the crust, hot spot volcanoes are formed successively above the hotspot, while the previously erupted magma begins to cool and form new mountains. The result is a tectonic plate with a mountain range formed by recurring volcanic eruptions, with the youngest mountain being on top of, or closest to, the hot spot. These mountain ranges can give a us insight into the direction and rate that the tectonic plates are drifting. Since we know that the youngest mountain, or volcano, will be located nearest or on top of the hot spot, we can analyze the direction in which the plate is moving by observing the direction in which the mountain range extends and considering the direction in which the plate likely moved over the hot spot to form said mountains. The rate at which the plate is moving can also be determined by dating the successive mountains in the range, and measuring the total distance the plate has shifted since the oldest mountain formation, and dividing that value by the age of the oldest mountain.             


2.) Describe the sequence of events that constitute the Wilson cycle and how this summary view of the processes associated with plate tectonic activity helps to explain the long-term process of continental break-up and assembly.


The Wilson cycle is a summarizing view of the long term process by which continents of the Earth can break up and reassemble. First, a continent rifts when it is broken up. Then, as spreading continues, an ocean forms, passively cooling the continental margins while accumulating sediment. Next, as other these plates diverge, other plates converge, and an oceanic plate subducts another plate, creating volcanic chains at the active margin. Sediment that accumulated during the second phase becomes welded (accretes) to the continent (lithified), forming new terrain. As two continents collide, the crust thickens, and lifts up to form mountainous features. Finally, the continent erodes, thinning the crust and causing eventual cracks or rifts. This cycle is a useful visual representation of the processes by which continents are broken down and built up again over time, and helps to understand these geological processes.        


