1.) What are the two major types of biogenic sediments found in the ocean and what organisms serve as their source materials? Also, what factors can affect the preservation of mineral compositions during sedimentation? 

The two major types of biogenic sediment found in the ocean are calcareous (carbonate) and siliceous oozes. The accumulation of the harder parts (shells,bones) of various marine organisms causes the build up of these sedimentary oozes in the ocean. Calcareous oozes are comprised of foraminifera (animals), nannoplankton and coccoliths (algae), and pteropods (snails), which dissolve as carbonate in the deep ocean at low temperatures, but are dominant throughout the shallow regions of the ocean. Siliceous oozes are comprised of diatoms (plant matter) in nutrient-rich water, and Radiolaria (animals), which dissolve more slowly. As the animal and plant matter dissolve in the ocean, they settle to the ocean floor at varying rates depending upon size and density of the particles. Large particles settle faster, and closer to the material from which they originate, while smaller particles take longer to settle, and are carried further by ocean currents from their source. In order for particles of sediment to be deposited, a valley or basin is required so that the sediment will remain stationary and eventually lithify. The largest basins on Earth are ocean basins, which currently cover a majority of the surface of the planet, and at points through out history, the sea level rises and floods even more of the continents (transgressions), carrying sediment back out into the oceans to dissolve. Hence, most of the well-preserved sedimentary rocks in the geologic record are marine sediments.          


2.) What processes are involved in the movement of terrigenous material from the continental shelf to the continental slope and the continental rise and what features of these sediment deposits facilitate recognition of their transport mechanism?

Terrigenous sediments are formed from the break down of land derived materials through various mechanical and chemical weathering and erosion. These sediments are then transported through wind, rivers, streams, water networks, and ice (glacial deposits). These systems eventually transport the sediment to shorelines, and some directly to the ocean (clay), where they accumulate on the continental shelf before eventually falling down the continental slope through gravity and other weathering processes. Turbidity currents and gravity also transport sand and gravel down submarine canyons starting from the continental slope down the continental rise, settling in submarine fans at the abyssal floor, forming graded rock beds of pelagic mud scoured by large particles of sand and gravel.        

